---
title: Project updates
description: updates us from the various groups
header: Project updates
---

## MESS

Isaac updates us

- re-write of gimmeSAD to MESS codebase
    - huge performance improvements 
    - clean, modern CLI and API
    - multi-island
    - phylogeny, traits (aka "Chase knob"), crude speciation
    - need help on speciation from mathematicians 
    - "Gillespie knob" determines how speciation depends on abundance
- online doc (!)
- analysis of data
    - spider data (from Brent Emerson) look cool!
    - using genetic data we identify near equilibrium, but with abundance only we miss that signal
    - we should look at covariance of posterior estimates says Luke Harmon
    - Mauritius vs. Reunion: higher entropy on older island
    - bacterioplankton *through time* look awesome!
        - colonization and extinction constant and stochastic through time
        - $\Lambda$ and Shannon linear increase through time
        
- Work to be done
    - new equilibrium definition: we have one from Rosindell and Harmon that might focus on only shallow time processes (e.g. abundance)
    - better goodness of fit metrics
    - right now it's ABC, but machine learning would be great
    - how we could work with replicated datasets (in space and time)


## alpha/beta

Luke M. updates us

- how does *in situ* speciation affect different components of richness? We know $\gamma$ diversity has an uptick for larger islands where *in situ* speciation occurs---where does that come from?  Does evolution influence $\alpha$, $\beta$ or both?
- variables of interest
    - predictors
        - island speciation fraction
        - island area---is there a speciation threshold?
        - island age
        - environmental covariates
    - responses
        - island richness
        - plot-level richness (central tendency across plots for an island of both $\alpha$ and $\beta$)
        - should we look at plot-level abundance?
- progress
    - cleaning script (standard format, culling non-natives)
    - rarefaction
    - exploratory analysis:
        - Azores arthropods: no effect of area or age at plot level
        - Hawaii trees: area affects $\gamma$, ages affects $\alpha$
- goals
    - more data: Galapagos snails, African cichlids, HI arthropods, more!
    - work on speciation
    - more on analytics
    - reconcile predictors
    - what to do with $\beta$ div when local sampling is different across studies?
    - what about cichlids says Luke H.? do they have a threshold? also Hawaii says Jon. He points out the main focus is how evolution at macroscale and ecology at the plot scale feedback on each other


## alpha/beta theory

Ben updates us

- simple infinite alleles type model
    - pure immigration:
        - small islands---gamma = alpha; big islands---alpha saturates, gamma continues to rise
    - add simple speciation, just shift patterns up (i.e. more diversity overall)
    - if speciation rate increases with area we get an uptick in both gamma and alpha
- next steps
    - $F_{st}$ type statistic to compare gamma and alpha
    - add a metacommunity
    - this week
        - division of labor

## island ontogeny

Rosie updates us by proxi for Jairo

- Jairo has generated a bunch of phylogeny data!
    - Hawaii: 12 arthropod lineages
    - Hawaii tree data
    - Macaronesia: 14 arthropod and 22 angiosperm lineages
    - Galapagos: 2 angiosperm
        - outline paper
        - decide on simulation setting (e.g. spatially implicit or explicit)
        - finish theory
- can these data be helpful for alpha/beta team in determining speciaton fraction?


## How to get genomics in the mix

Angela updates us

- SNP data to look at early stages of speciation shortly after colonization
- how does allele frequency spectrum vary through time---awesome!!
    - compare old island and young islands---where do we see the rare variants?
    - colonization without a bottleneck vs. colonization with a bottleneck: standing variation vs. novel variation
    - data:
        - Reunion nematodes---full genome resequencing which is great
        - Hawaii arthropod RAD seq forthcoming

## island/mainland diversification

James updates us

- Is diversification different on islands vs. mainlands?
    - Is it that clades that make it to islands are special?
    - Or does any random clade, once it's on an island, diversify differently?
    - Compare sister lineages on islands vs. mainlands and island clades vs. random clades drawn from the global phylogeny
    - Data:
        - mammal phylo (Luke H. just gave us this [alternative tree](https://github.com/uyedaj/bmr) and it's cherry)
        - birds to come
        - Kreft "islandness" shapefiles
        - new data:
            - amphibians?
            - lizards?
            - angiosperms
    - Analysis:
        - is it sufficient to look at clade age and clade richness
        - Luke H thinks whole phylo approach could be easier (methods are more straightforward but not without their controversy)


## An introduction from Brent

- Community based sampling to
    - characterize ecological patterns
    - identify drivers of speciation
- Using:
    - standard plots and standard taxonomy combined with individual-based seq
        - 25 plots in laurel forests and expanding into dry habitat
        - spiders and beetles
        - 4 individuals per species sequenced for mtDNA and RADseq
            - shows some cool patterns like east-west community-wide divergence based on moisture discontinuity
        - also using metabarcoding
            - soil arthropods
            - shows clear differentiation (cool!) of habitats in ordination space: is that from species turnover or genetic structure within a constant set of species? 
        - taxon-focused sampling to connect population process to phylo pattern
            - e.g. weevil that diversified a lot but doesn't show clear adaptive differences between spp---is it acute dispersal limitation?
- A main conclusion: recent events (e.g. Pleistocene) seem to be very important for diversification
